=head1 NAME

B<ftimes> - A system baselining and evidence collection tool.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<ftimes> B<--cfgtest> B<file> B<mode> B<[-s]>

B<ftimes> B<--compare> B<mask> B<baseline> B<snapshot> B<[-l level]>

B<ftimes> B<--decoder> B<snapshot> B<[-l level]>

B<ftimes> B<--digauto> B<file> B<[-l level]> B<[list]>

B<ftimes> B<--digfull> B<file> B<[-l level]> B<[list]>

B<ftimes> B<--diglean> B<file> B<[-l level]> B<[list]>

B<ftimes> B<--getmode> B<file> B<[-l level]>

B<ftimes> B<--mapauto> B<mask> B<[-l level]> B<[list]>

B<ftimes> B<--mapfull> B<file> B<[-l level]> B<[list]>

B<ftimes> B<--maplean> B<file> B<[-l level]> B<[list]>

B<ftimes> B<--version>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<FTimes> is a system baselining and evidence collection tool.
The primary purpose of B<FTimes> is to gather and/or develop
information about specified directories and files in a manner
conducive to intrusion analysis.

B<FTimes> is a lightweight tool in the sense that it doesn't need
to be "installed" on a given system to work on that system, it is
small enough to fit on a single floppy, and it provides only a
command line interface.

Preserving records of all activity that occurs during a snapshot
is important for intrusion analysis and evidence admissibility.
For this reason, B<FTimes> was designed to log four types of
information: configuration settings, progress indicators, metrics,
and errors.  Output produced by B<FTimes> is delimited text, and
therefore, is easily assimilated by a wide variety of existing
tools.

B<FTimes> basically implements two general capabilities: file
topography and string search.  File topography is the process of
mapping key attributes of directories and files on a given file
system.  String search is the process of digging through directories
and files on a given file system while looking for a specific
sequence of bytes.  Respectively, these capabilities are referred
to as map mode and dig mode.

B<FTimes> supports two operating environments: workbench and
client-server.  In the workbench environment, the operator uses
B<FTimes> to do things such as examine evidence (e.g., a disk image
or files from a compromised system), analyze snapshots for change,
search for files that have specific attributes, verify file integrity,
and so on.  In the client-server environment, the focus shifts from
what the operator can do locally to how the operator can efficiently
monitor, manage, and aggregate snapshot data for many hosts.  In
the client-server environment, the primary goal is to move collected
data from the host to a centralized system, known as an Integrity
Server, in a secure and authenticated fashion.  An Integrity Server
is a hardened system that has been configured to handle B<FTimes>
GET, PING, and PUT HTTP/S requests.

The B<FTimes> distribution contains a script called nph-ftimes.cgi
that may be used in conjunction with a Web server to implement a
public Integrity Server interface.  Deeper topics such as the
construction and internal mechanics of an Integrity Server are not
addressed in this document.

B<FTimes> provides several modes of operation that either implement
its basic capabilities or support them in some way.  These modes
are described in the MODES OF OPERATION section of this document
and are outlined here:

=over 5

=item *

cfgtest - check config file syntax for a given file and mode

=item *

compare - compare two map snapshots to detect change

=item *

decoder - decode a compressed map snapshot

=item *

digauto - search for strings in files using a default configuration

=item *

digfull - search for strings in files using a specified configuration

=item *

diglean - same as digfull except that the range of controls is limited and output can be written directly to std{err,out}

=item *

getmode - download a config file from an Integrity Server

=item *

mapauto - collect directory and file attributes using a default configuration

=item *

mapfull - collect directory and file attributes using a specified configuration

=item *

maplean - same as mapfull except that the range of controls is limited and output can be written directly to std{err,out}

=item *

version - display version information and exit

=back

B<FTimes> also has many controls which dictate how it will execute.
Some modes support very few controls while others support quite a
few.  The following table summarizes what controls apply to each
mode of operation.  An 'X' indicates that the given control applies
to the selected mode.

                      ==========   MODES   =======
                      c  c  d  d  d  g  m  m  m  v
                      f  o  i  i  i  e  a  a  a  e
                      g  m  g  g  g  t  p  p  p  r
                      t  p  a  f  l  m  a  f  l  s
                      e  a  u  u  e  o  u  u  e  i
                      s  r  t  l  a  d  t  l  a  o
                      t  e  o  l  n  e  o  l  n  n
   ======   CONTROL   ============================
   AnalyzeBlockSize   .  .  .  X  X  .  .  X  X  .
   AnalyzeCarrySize   .  .  .  X  X  .  .  .  .  .
   AnalyzeDeviceFiles .  .  .  X  X  .  .  X  X  .
   AnalyzeRemoteFiles .  .  .  X  X  .  .  X  X  .
   AnalyzeStepSize    .  .  .  X  X  .  .  .  .  .
   BaseName           .  .  .  X  X  X  .  X  X  .
   BaseNameSuffix     .  .  .  X  X  .  .  X  X  .
   Compress           .  .  .  .  .  .  .  X  X  .
   DigString          .  .  X  X  X  .  .  .  .  .
   DigStringNoCase    .  .  X  X  X  .  .  .  .  .
   DigStringNormal    .  .  X  X  X  .  .  .  .  .
   DigStringRegExp    .  .  X  X  X  .  .  .  .  .
   DigStringXMagic    .  .  X  X  X  .  .  .  .  .
   EnableRecursion    .  .  .  X  X  .  .  X  X  .
   Exclude            .  .  .  X  X  .  .  X  X  .
   ExcludeFilter      .  .  .  X  X  .  .  X  X  .
   ExcludesMustExist  .  .  .  X  X  .  .  X  X  .
   FieldMask          .  X  .  .  .  .  X  X  X  .
   FileSizeLimit      .  .  .  X  X  .  .  X  X  .
   GetAndExec         .  .  .  .  .  X  .  .  .  .
   GetFileName        .  .  .  .  .  X  .  .  .  .
   HashDirectories    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  X  X  .
   HashSymbolicLinks  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  X  X  .
   Import             .  .  .  X  X  X  .  X  X  .
   Include            .  .  .  X  X  .  .  X  X  .
   IncludeFilter      .  .  .  X  X  .  .  X  X  .
   IncludesMustExist  .  .  .  X  X  .  .  X  X  .
   LogDir             .  .  .  X  X  .  .  X  X  .
   MagicFile          .  .  .  .  .  .  .  X  X  .
   MapRemoteFiles     .  .  .  X  X  .  .  X  X  .
   MatchLimit         .  .  .  X  X  .  .  .  .  .
   NewLine            .  .  .  X  X  .  .  X  X  .
   OutDir             .  .  .  X  X  .  .  X  X  .
   RequirePrivilege   .  .  .  X  X  .  .  X  X  .
   RunType            .  .  .  X  .  .  .  X  .  .
   SSLBundledCAsFile  .  .  .  X  .  X  .  X  .  .
   SSLExpectedPeerCN  .  .  .  X  .  X  .  X  .  .
   SSLMaxChainLength  .  .  .  X  .  X  .  X  .  .
   SSLPassPhrase      .  .  .  X  .  X  .  X  .  .
   SSLPrivateKeyFile  .  .  .  X  .  X  .  X  .  .
   SSLPublicCertFile  .  .  .  X  .  X  .  X  .  .
   SSLUseCertificate  .  .  .  X  .  X  .  X  .  .
   SSLVerifyPeerCert  .  .  .  X  .  X  .  X  .  .
   URLAuthType        .  .  .  X  .  X  .  X  .  .
   URLGetRequest      .  .  .  .  .  X  .  .  .  .
   URLGetURL          .  .  .  .  .  X  .  .  .  .
   URLPassword        .  .  .  X  .  X  .  X  .  .
   URLPutSnapshot     .  .  .  X  .  .  .  X  .  .
   URLPutURL          .  .  .  X  .  .  .  X  .  .
   URLUnlinkOutput    .  .  .  X  .  .  .  X  .  .
   URLUsername        .  .  .  X  .  X  .  X  .  .

=head1 MODES OF OPERATION

The modes of operation described in this section are mutually
exclusive.  In other words, only one mode may be specified per
invocation.  Unless otherwise stated, the value for the B<baseline>,
B<snapshot>, and B<file> arguments may be the name of a regular file
or '-'.  If the latter form is given, B<FTimes> expects to read the
equivalent input from stdin.  Note, however, that the B<baseline> and
B<snapshot> arguments can not be '-' simultaneously.  The elements and
syntax rules of for all configuration files are described in the
CONFIGURATION CONTROLS section of this document.  The B<level> option
is described in the OPTIONS section of this document.  The B<list>
option specifies one or more directories, files, or symbolic links
that are to be scanned.  Collectively, these items represent an
B<Include> list.  See the B<Include> control for more information.

=over 5

=item B<--cfgtest> B<{file|-}> B<mode> B<[-s]>

Verify the syntax of a given configuration B<file> in the context of a
specified B<mode> where B<mode> can be one of: B<digauto>, B<digfull>,
B<diglean>, B<getmode>, B<mapfull>, or B<maplean>.  The given
configuration B<file> is parsed with the same methods that would be
used if B<FTimes> had been invoked in that particular run B<mode>.  By
default, directories and files are not checked for existence.  This
allows config files to be tested in a separate environment from where
they will be used.  Strict testing (i.e., directories and files must
exist) may be enabled with the B<-s> option.

The value 'Syntax Passed' is written to stdout, if all syntax checks
are satisfied.  Otherwise, the value 'Syntax Failed' and a description
of the failure will be written to stdout.

Note: The fact that a given file passes all syntax checks does not
guarantee that its use will lead to a successful outcome.  It merely
ensures that specified controls are valid for a given mode, and
the values for those controls meet basic syntax requirements.

=item B<--compare> B<mask> B<{baseline|-}> B<{snapshot|-}> B<[-l level]>

Compare B<baseline> and B<snapshot> data according to the specified
B<mask> where mask identifies the attributes to be analyzed.  Output
is written to stdout and has the following format:

    category|name|changed|unknown

The category field indicates what type of change has occurred.  It
can have one of the following values:

    C - Changed
    M - Missing
    N - New
    U - Unknown (i.e., one or both fields were NULL)
    X - Cross (i.e., Changed and Unknown)

The changed field contains a comma separated list of fields that
have changed.  This field will be NULL if the category is New or
Missing.

The unknown field contains a comma separated list of fields that
could not be compared due to lack of information.  This field will
be NULL if the category is New or Missing.

The specified B<mask> must comply with the syntax rules set forth
for the B<FieldMask> control.

Note: The B<baseline> and B<snapshot> arguments can not be '-'
simultaneously.

Note: Support for comparing compressed snapshots was added in version
3.6.0.

=item B<--decoder> B<{snapshot|-}> B<[-l level]>

Decode a compressed B<snapshot>.  A compressed snapshot can be
created by running B<FTimes> in map mode (i.e., B<mapfull> or
B<maplean>) with B<Compress> enabled.  Output is written to stdout.

=item B<--digauto> B<{file|-}> B<[-l level]> B<[list]>

Use default configuration settings to search an B<Include> list for
a set of user defined strings.  These strings are defined in B<file>
according to the syntax for the B<DigStringNormal>, B<DigStringNoCase>,
and B<DigStringRegExp> controls.  If B<list> is not specified,
B<FTimes> will search the entire system including remote shares or
mount points.  Any device files specifically included in the B<list>
will be searched (i.e., B<AnalyzeDeviceFiles> is always enabled in
this mode of operation).  Output is written to stdout and has the
following format.

    name|type|tag|offset|string

The offset field, represented as a decimal value, contains the
location in the file identified by name where the specified string
was found.

=item B<--digfull> B<{file|-}> B<[-l level]> B<[list]>

Use the configuration settings in B<file> to search an B<Include> list
for a set of user defined strings.  The B<Include> list may be specified
by a combination of B<Include> controls and B<list> arguments.  If
an B<Include> list is not specified, B<FTimes> will search the entire
system.  Remote shares or mount points will only be searched if
B<AnalyzeRemoteFiles> is enabled.  Any device files specifically
included in the B<list> will only be searched if B<AnalyzeDeviceFiles>
is enabled.

=item B<--diglean> B<{file|-}> B<[-l level]> B<[list]>

Use the configuration settings in B<file> to search an B<Include> list
for a set of user defined strings.  The B<Include> list may be specified
by a combination of B<Include> controls and B<list> arguments.  If
an B<Include> list is not specified, B<FTimes> will search the entire
system.  Remote shares or mount points will only be searched if
B<AnalyzeRemoteFiles> is enabled.  Any device files specifically
included in the B<list> will only be searched if B<AnalyzeDeviceFiles>
is enabled.  The difference between this mode and B<--digfull> is
that fewer controls are defined/available and output can be written
directly to std{err,out}.

=item B<--getmode> B<{file|-}>

Use the configuration settings in B<file> to download digfull,
diglean, mapfull, or maplean configuration information.  One of
three possible actions, depending on how getmode is configured,
will take place once the download is complete:

=over 5

=item *

B<FTimes> writes the downloaded information to stdout,

=item *

B<FTimes> writes the downloaded information to the file specified by B<GetFileName>, or

=item *

B<FTimes> restarts in B<digfull>, B<diglean>, B<mapfull>, or B<maplean> using the downloaded information as its new configuration file

=back

The first action is effected when B<GetAndExec> is disabled and
B<GetFileName> is not specified.  The second action is effected
when B<GetAndExec> is disabled and B<GetFileName> is specified.
The third action is effected when B<GetAndExec> is enabled and
B<GetFileName> is specified.

=item B<--mapauto> B<mask> B<[-l level]> B<[list]>

Use default configuration settings to map an B<Include> list according
to the specified B<mask> where mask identifies the attributes to
be collected.  If B<list> is not specified, B<FTimes> will map the
entire system including remote shares or mount points.  Any device
files specifically included in the B<list> will be mapped (i.e.,
B<AnalyzeDeviceFiles> is always enabled in this mode of operation).
Output is written to stdout, and its format depends on the value
of B<mask>.

The specified B<mask> must comply with the syntax rules set forth
for the B<FieldMask> control.

=item B<--mapfull> B<{file|-}> B<[-l level]> B<[list]>

Use configuration settings in B<file> to map an B<Include> list.  The
B<Include> list may be specified by a combination of B<Include> controls
and B<list> arguments.  If an B<Include> list is not specified,
B<FTimes> will map the entire system.  Remote shares or mount points
will only be mapped if B<AnalyzeRemoteFiles> is enabled.  Any device
files specifically included in the B<list> will only be mapped
if B<AnalyzeDeviceFiles> is enabled.

=item B<--maplean> B<{file|-}> B<[-l level]> B<[list]>

Use configuration settings in B<file> to map an B<Include> list.  The
B<Include> list may be specified by a combination of B<Include> controls
and B<list> arguments.  If an B<Include> list is not specified, B<FTimes>
will map the entire system.  Remote shares or mount points will
only be mapped if B<AnalyzeRemoteFiles> is enabled.  Any device
files specifically included in the B<list> will only be mapped
if B<AnalyzeDeviceFiles> is enabled.  The difference between this mode
and B<--mapfull> is that fewer controls are defined/available and
output can be written directly to std{err,out}.

=item B<--version>

Display version information and exit.

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 5

=item B<-l level>

The B<LogLevel> option controls the amount of log output. As B<level>
decreases, the amount of output increases. The range of values that
may be assigned to B<level> is stated below.  In cases where evidence
collection is of primary concern, B<LogLevel> should be no higher
than Landmark.  The default B<LogLevel> is Landmark.

    6 - Critical
    5 - Failure
    4 - Warning
    3 - Information
    2 - Landmark
    1 - Waypoint
    0 - Debug

=item B<-s>

Enforce strict testing.  This requires that specified directories
and files exist on the system running the test.  Controls affected
by this option include: B<LogDir>, B<OutDir>, B<SSLPublicCertFile>,
B<SSLPrivateKeyFile>, and B<SSLBundledCAsFile>.

=back

=head1 CONFIGURATION CONTROLS

This section describes the various controls that B<FTimes> recognizes.
In general, controls either shape runtime behavior or provide
information needed by the application to perform a specific function.
Controls and their values, one pair/line, are written to a file
having the following format.

    <control> = <value>

All controls are case insensitive, but, in general, their values
are not.  Comments may occur anywhere on a given line, and must
begin with a pound character (i.e., '#').  In any given line, all
text to the right of the first comment will be ignored.  White
space surrounding controls and values is ignored.

=head2 CONTROL DESCRIPTIONS

This section describes each control that may be specified, defines
what values it may have, and states which modes of operation
recognize the control.

=over 5

=item B<AnalyzeBlockSize>: [1-1048576]

Applies to B<digfull>, B<diglean>, B<mapfull>, and B<maplean>.

B<AnalyzeBlockSize> is optional.  It instructs the analysis engine
to use the specified block size (in bytes) when reading and processing
file data.  The default value for this control is 16384 (16 KB).

=item B<AnalyzeCarrySize>: [1-1048576]

Applies to B<digfull>, B<diglean>.

B<AnalyzeCarrySize> is optional.  It instructs the analysis engine
to use the specified block size (in bytes) when saving (or carrying)
data from one dig operation to the next.  The default value for
this control is 1024 (1 KB).

Note: The value for this control must not exceed B<AnalyzeBlockSize>,
and it must be equal to or larger than the maximum string length
for normal and case insenstive strings.  If either condition is not
met, the program will abort.

=item B<AnalyzeDeviceFiles>: [Y|N]

Applies to B<digfull>, B<diglean>, B<mapfull>, and B<maplean>.

B<AnalyzeDeviceFiles> is optional.  When enabled ('Y' or 'y'), it
instructs B<FTimes> to analyze block/character device files that
have been specifically included by name on the command line or
through an B<Include> (e.g., Include=/dev/ad0).  Device files that
reside in an included directory (e.g., Include=/dev) are not analyzed
simply because their parent was included -- you must specifically
call them out.  Also, any device files that were specifically
included will be pruned if their parent or any higher level directory
was included too.  The default value is 'N'.

Note: Analyzing block/character device files can take a very long
time or forever (e.g., /dev/zero).

=item B<AnalyzeRemoteFiles>: [Y|N]

Applies to B<digfull>, B<diglean>, B<mapfull>, and B<maplean>.

B<AnalyzeRemoteFiles> is optional.  When enabled ('Y' or 'y'), it
instructs B<FTimes> to ignore the fact that a given B<Include> does
not reside on the local system.  The result is that B<FTimes> will
attempt to analyze remote files.  The default value is 'N'.

Note: Analyzing remote file systems can create large amounts of
network traffic.  Just remember that you may be mapping an entire
disk.

=item B<AnalyzeStepSize>: [1-1048576]

Applies to B<digfull>, B<diglean>.

B<AnalyzeStepSize> is optional.  It instructs the analysis engine to
step through the search buffer in increments of the specified size.
Currently, this control may only be used in conjunction with the
DigStringXMagic control.  Internally, B<AnalyzeStepSize> is capped to
prevent its value from exceeding the value for B<AnalyzeBlockSize>.
The default value for this control is 16384 (16 KB).

Note: This control is only available if XMagic support was compiled
into the binary.

=item B<BaseName>: <name|->

Applies to B<digfull>, B<diglean>, B<getmode>, B<mapfull>, and
B<maplean>.

B<BaseName> is required.  It specifies the name prefix that will
be attached to the various output files.  It also serves as the
CLIENTID parameter in GET/PING/PUT requests.  The recommended name
format is one that matches the following regular expression:

    ^[0-9A-Za-z_-]{1,64}$

This is because nph-ftimes.cgi uses that expression to validate the
CLIENTID parameter in GET/PING/PUT requests.  Typically, B<BaseName>
and B<URLUsername> will be the same when basic authentication is
enabled, but this is not a requirement.

If you're using FTimes in a lean mode, a good naming convention
would be to use the hostname of the system being baselined.  Also,
both lean modes allow you to specify a B<BaseName> value of '-'.
This causes FTimes to write its output to stdout/stderr.

=item B<BaseNameSuffix>: [datetime|none|pid]

Applies to B<digfull>, B<diglean>, B<mapfull>, and B<maplean>.

B<BaseNameSuffix> is optional.  It specifies the type of suffix
that will be attached to the B<BaseName>.  If B<BaseNameSuffix> is
set to datetime, a suffix of the following format will be appended
to the B<BaseName>: YYYYMMDDHHMMSS.  If it is set to none, no suffix
will be appended, and if it is set to pid, the value of the current
process ID will be appended.  The default value is none.

=item B<Compress>: [Y|N]

Applies to B<mapfull> and B<maplean>.

B<Compress> is optional.  When enabled ('Y' or 'y'), it activates
a form of lossless ASCII compression.  This yields a compression
ratio that can be as good as three to one.  The default value is
'N'.

As a side note, compressing compressed snapshots with a program
like gzip(1) yields better compression than if gzip(1) was used
alone on the same data in its uncompressed form.

=item B<DigString>: <string> [<tag>]

Applies to B<digauto>, B<digfull>, and B<diglean>.

B<DigString> is an alias for B<DigStringNormal>, and it is being
phased out.  Please use B<DigStringNormal> instead.

=item B<DigStringNoCase>: <string> [<tag>]

Applies to B<digauto>, B<digfull>, and B<diglean>.

B<DigStringNoCase> is conditionally required.  It specifies a case
insensitive search string.  This string must be URL encoded in the
same manner as a normal dig string -- refer to the B<DigStringNormal> control
description for the details.  Internally, all alpha characters
(i.e., [A-Za-z]) are converted to lower case.

An optional tag may specified.  Tags can be used to identify a given
dig string or set of strings -- the same tag may be assigned to
multiple strings.  This can make the process of analyzing dig output
much easier.  However, tags must not contain embedded white space, and
they must be less than 64 bytes long.

=item B<DigStringNormal>: <string> [<tag>]

Applies to B<digauto>, B<digfull>, and B<diglean>.

B<DigStringNormal> is conditionally required.  It specifies a search
string.  This string must be URL encoded if it contains '%', '+',
' ', or any non-printable characters.  When in doubt about whether
or not a value should be encoded, encode it.  To encode a character,
convert its hex value according to the format %HH where H is a hex
digit.  Spaces may alternatively be encoded as '+'.

An optional tag may specified.  Tags can be used to identify a given
dig string or set of strings -- the same tag may be assigned to
multiple strings.  This can make the process of analyzing dig output
much easier.  However, tags must not contain embedded white space, and
they must be less than 64 bytes long.

=item B<DigStringRegExp>: <regexp> [<tag>]

Applies to B<digauto>, B<digfull>, and B<diglean>.

B<DigStringRegExp> is conditionally required.  It specifies a Perl
compatible regular expression.  Unlike the strings specified in the
B<DigStringNormal> and B<DigStringNoCase> controls, this string must not
be URL encoded.  With B<DigStringRegExp> patterns, you must specify
no more than one capturing '()' subpattern.  You can use '(?:)' if
you require additional parentheses for grouping purposes.  If you
do not specify a capturing subpattern, the entire match will be
captured.

An optional tag may specified.  Tags can be used to identify a given
dig string or set of strings -- the same tag may be assigned to
multiple strings.  This can make the process of analyzing dig output
much easier.  However, tags must not contain embedded white space, and
they must be less than 64 bytes long.

Note: This control is only available if PCRE support was compiled
into the binary.  As of version 3.5.0, PCRE support is enabled by
default.

=item B<DigStringXMagic>: <file> [<tag>]

Applies to B<digauto>, B<digfull>, and B<diglean>.

B<DigStringXMagic> is conditionally required.  It specifies the name
of a file that contains one or more XMagic incantations.  The XMagic
file may be specified as a relative path.

An optional tag may specified.  Tags can be used to identify a given
dig string or set of strings -- the same tag may be assigned to
multiple strings.  This can make the process of analyzing dig output
much easier.  However, tags must not contain embedded white space, and
they must be less than 64 bytes long.

Note: This control is only available if XMagic support was compiled
into the binary.

=item B<EnableRecursion>: [Y|N]

Applies to B<digfull>, B<diglean>, B<mapfull>, and B<maplean>.

B<EnableRecursion> is optional.  When enabled ('Y' or 'y'), it
instructs B<FTimes> to recursively process directories.  The default
value is 'Y'.

=item B<Exclude>: [directory|file|link]

Applies to B<digfull>, B<diglean>, B<mapfull>, and B<maplean>.

B<Exclude> controls are optional, and there is no predefined limit
on the number that may be specified.  However, there can be only
one B<Exclude> control/value pair per line.  It is not necessary
to explicitly exclude special file systems such as PROCFS
as B<FTimes> will detect their presence and automatically exclude
them.  B<Exclude> values must be specified as a fully qualified
path (see B<Include> control).  If B<ExcludesMustExist> is enabled,
then each B<Exclude> must reference an existing file, directory,
or symbolic link.  Otherwise, B<FTimes> will abort.

Note: Symbolic links are not supported in WIN32-based file systems.

Note: The exlude mechanism works on an exact match basis, but it
can be used to produce a recursive effect.  For example, if you
include '/' and exclude '/etc', then '/etc' and anything below it
will not be processed.  However, if you include '/etc/hosts' and
exclude '/etc', then '/etc/hosts' will be processed because the
recursive effect would not be in play, and there is no B<Exclude>
that exactly matches it.

=item B<ExcludeFilter>: <regexp>

Applies to B<digfull>, B<diglean>, B<mapfull>, and B<maplean>.

B<ExcludeFilter> controls are optional, and there is no predefined
limit on the number that may be specified.  However, there can be only
one B<ExcludeFilter> control/value pair per line.

Each B<ExcludeFilter> must be specified as a Perl compatible regular
expression with the exception that capturing '()' subpatterns and back
references are not allowed.  You can use '(?:)' if you require
parentheses for grouping purposes.

Any path matched by an B<ExcludeFilter> will be rejected.  All other
paths will be mapped subject to include filter processing.  If no
exclude filters are specified, exclude filter processing is implicitly
disabled.

Note: This control is only available if PCRE support was compiled
into the binary.

=item B<ExcludesMustExist>: [Y|N]

Applies to B<digfull>, B<diglean>, B<mapfull>, and B<maplean>.

B<ExcludesMustExist> is optional.  When enabled ('Y' or 'y'), it
instructs B<FTimes> to check that every B<Exclude> exists prior to
mapping or digging.  If this control is enabled and any B<Exclude>
does not exist, B<FTimes> will abort.  The default value is 'N'.

=item B<FieldMask>: <mask>

Applies to B<compare>, B<mapauto>, B<mapfull>, and B<maplean>.

B<FieldMask> is required in B<compare>.  Its value indicates what
fields are to be compared for change.

B<FieldMask> is required in B<mapauto>, B<mapfull>, and B<maplean>.
Its value dictates what attributes get collected or derived during
a scan.

There can be no embedded white space in a given mask specification,
and it must comply with the following case insensitive syntax:

    ALL[<+|-><field>...]

or

    NONE<+|-><field>[<+|-><field>...]

The following fields may be specified on Windows platforms with two
caveats:  (1) chtime is only available on Windows NT/2K systems and
(2) altstreams is only available if the target file system is NTFS.

    volume     - Volume serial number
    findex     - File serial number
    attributes - File attributes
    atime      - Time of last file access
    mtime      - Time of last file modification
    ctime      - Creation time
    chtime     - Change time (undocumented)
    size       - File size in bytes
    altstreams - Number of alternate or named streams
    md5        - MD5 digest of the file's data stream
    sha1       - SHA1 digest of the file's data stream
    sha256     - SHA256 digest of the file's data stream
    magic      - File type

The following fields may be specified on UNIX platforms:

    dev        - Device identification number
    inode      - File identification number
    mode       - File attributes and permissions
    nlink      - Number of hard links
    uid        - User identification number
    gid        - Group identification number
    rdev       - Device type (contains major/minor numbers)
    atime      - Time of last file access
    mtime      - Time of last file modification
    ctime      - Time of last file status change
    size       - File size in bytes
    md5        - MD5 digest of the file's data stream
    sha1       - SHA1 digest of the file's data stream
    sha256     - SHA256 digest of the file's data stream
    magic      - File type

In addition to the standard fields, the following group fields may be
specified:

    hashes     - Compute all supported hash values
    times      - Collect all supported time values

For example, the "hashes field is equivalent to "md5+sha1+sha256".
Similarly, the "times" field is equivalent to "atime+mtime+ctime" and
"atime+mtime+ctime+chtime" on UNIX and Windows platforms,
respectively.

=item B<FileSizeLimit>: <integer>

Applies to B<digfull>, B<diglean>, B<mapfull>, and B<maplean>.

B<FileSizeLimit> is optional.  It instructs the analysis engine to
skip files that are larger than the specified size limit.  The
default value is zero, which means do not impose a limit.

=item B<GetAndExec>: [Y|N]

Applies to B<getmode>.

B<GetAndExec> is optional.  When enabled ('Y' or 'y'), it causes
B<FTimes> to start a new snapshot once the download is complete.
This is accomplished through an exec() call.  B<GetAndExec> depends
on B<GetFileName>.  The default value is 'N'.

Note: Take care when specifying B<GetFileName>.  If you choose a
location that is writeable by other processes, B<FTimes> may not
read the config file you intended it to.  That is to say, some other
process may have modified or replaced the origianl file.

=item B<GetFileName>: <file>

Applies to B<getmode>.

B<GetFileName> is required if B<GetAndExec> is enabled.  Its value
is the name of the file in which the downloaded configuration
information is to be stored.  B<GetFileName> may be specified as a
relative path.

=item B<HashDirectories>: [Y|N]

Applies to B<mapfull> and B<maplean>.

B<HashDirectories> is optional.  When enabled ('Y' or 'y'), it
instructs B<FTimes> to compute digests for directories.  This is
done by hashing the digests of all files and directories contained
in a given directory in the order they are encountered.  Thus, if
a directory has the following structure where D{1|2} and F{1|2}
represent directories and files respectively,

  D1
   |
   - F1
   + D2
      |
      - F2

then, assuming that F1 is mapped before D2, D1 and D2 have the
following hashes:

  Hash(D2) = H(H(F2))
  Hash(D1) = H(H(F1), Hash(D2))

where H represents the hash algorithm (e.g., MD5, SHA1, etc.).

If an entry within the directory is a special file (e.g., a device)
or cannot be opened/hashed, a 16 byte string consisting of all zeros
is used for the computation.  The default value is 'N'.

=item B<HashSymbolicLinks>: [Y|N]

Applies to B<mapfull> and B<maplean>.

B<HashSymbolicLinks> is optional.  When enabled ('Y' or 'y'), it
instructs B<FTimes> to compute digests for symbolic links.  This
is done by hashing the data returned by readlink().  The default
value is 'Y'.

=item B<Import>: <file>

Applies to B<digfull>, B<diglean>, B<mapfull>, B<maplean>, and B<getmode>.

B<Import> is optional.  When specified, the directives contained
in the file referenced by this control are included in the current
configuration.  Multiple instances of this control are allowed per
file, and recursion is permitted up to three levels deep.  Imports
may be specified using a relative path.

=item B<Include>: [directory|file|link]

Applies to B<digfull>, B<diglean>, B<mapfull>, and B<maplean>.

B<Include> controls are optional, and there is no predefined limit
on the number that may be specified.  However, there can be only
one B<Include> control/value pair per line.  If no B<Include>
controls are specified, B<FTimes> will attempt to map the entire
system.  If B<IncludesMustExist> is enabled, then each B<Include>
must reference an existing file, directory, or symbolic link.
Otherwise, B<FTimes> will abort.

B<Include> values must be a regular file, directory, or symbolic
link specified as a fully qualified path.  For WIN32 file systems,
this means that each B<Include> must begin with a drive designator
([A-Za-z]:) and be followed by the target path (e.g., 'c:\temp').
For UNIX file systems, each B<Include> must begin with a forward
slash (e.g., '/tmp').

Note: Symbolic links are not supported in WIN32-based file systems.

Note: Take care when including file systems that reside on remote
shares because B<FTimes> may attempt to map them.  To prevent this
from happening, you can either exclude the remote file system or
disable B<AnalyzeRemoteFiles>.

Note: Directory hashing only applies to directories.  This means
that each file B<Include> is treated as an isolated object apart
from any specific tree.  The exception to this is any B<Include>
that gets automatically pruned because it's part of a larger branch.

=item B<IncludeFilter>: <regexp>

Applies to B<digfull>, B<diglean>, B<mapfull>, and B<maplean>.

B<IncludeFilter> controls are optional, and there is no predefined
limit on the number that may be specified.  However, there can be only
one B<IncludeFilter> control/value pair per line.

Each B<IncludeFilter> must be specified as a Perl compatible regular
expression with the exception that capturing '()' subpatterns and back
references are not allowed.  You can use '(?:)' if you require
parentheses for grouping purposes.

Any path matched by an B<IncludeFilter> will be mapped.  Any other
paths will be rejected.  Also note that exclude filter processing
occurs before include filter processing.  If no include filters are
specified, include filter processing is implicitly disabled.

Note: This control is only available if PCRE support was compiled
into the binary.

Warning: Due to their nature, include filters require mandatory
directory traversal.  This, in turn, will potentially alter directory
access times.  For example, suppose that you want to process all files
that end with the string: '.pdf'. The B<IncludeFilter> would be
specified as follows:

    IncludeFilter=\.pdf$

Generally speaking, there is no way to know, apriori, where all these
files are located.  Therefore, it is necessary to traverse all
directories applying the filter to each path as it's encountered.

=item B<IncludesMustExist>: [Y|N]

Applies to B<digfull>, B<diglean>, B<mapfull>, and B<maplean>.

B<IncludesMustExist> is optional.  When enabled ('Y' or 'y'), it
instructs B<FTimes> to check that every B<Include> exists prior to
mapping or digging.  If this control is enabled and any B<Include>
does not exist, B<FTimes> will abort.  The default value is 'N'.

=item B<LogDir>: <directory>

Applies to B<digfull>, B<diglean>, B<mapfull>, and B<maplean>.

B<LogDir> is optional.  It tells B<FTimes> where to write log data.
If not specified, the value of B<OutDir> will be used as the value
for B<LogDir>.  B<LogDir> may be specified as a relative path.

=item B<MagicFile>: <file>

Applies to B<mapfull> and B<maplean>.

B<MagicFile> is optional.  If the magic field in B<FieldMask> is
set and B<MagicFile> references a valid XMagic file, B<FTimes>
attempts to determine the type of each file it maps.  If the magic
field is not set, this control is ignored.  B<MagicFile> may be
specified as a relative path.  Additional information regaring XMagic
can be found here:

  http://ftimes.sourceforge.net/FTimes/XMagic.shtml

Note: XMagic is not built into B<FTimes> by default.  If your version
of B<FTimes> does not have this support and the magic field is
requested, B<FTimes> will produce null fields.

Note: XMagic is automatically disabled if compression is enabled.

=item B<MapRemoteFiles>: [Y|N]

Applies to B<digfull>, B<diglean>, B<mapfull>, and B<maplean>.

B<MapRemoteFiles> is an alias for B<AnalyzeRemoteFiles>, and it is
being phased out.  Please use B<AnalyzeRemoteFiles> instead.

=item B<MatchLimit>: <integer>

Applies to B<digfull> and B<diglean>.

B<MatchLimit> is optional.  It instructs the search engine to stop
searching for a particular pattern within a file once the specified
match limit has been reached.  The default value is zero, which
means do not impose a limit.

Note: Searching for a string such as 'A' with a MatchLimit of zero
may produce a tremendous amount of output.

=item B<NewLine>: [LF|CRLF]

Applies to B<digfull>, B<diglean>, B<mapfull>, and B<maplean>.

B<NewLine> is optional.  When set to the value CRLF, it generates
Windows style line feeds (i.e., carriage return and linefeed).  When
B<NewLine> is set to the value LF, it generates UNIX style line
feeds (i.e., linefeed).  This control is useful if you review/analyze
data sets from different platforms on one particular computer.  The
default value is the native value for the operating system running
the program.

=item B<OutDir>: <directory>

Applies to B<digfull>, B<diglean>, B<mapfull>, and B<maplean>.

B<OutDir> is required.  It tells B<FTimes> where to write output
data.  If not specified, the program will abort.  B<OutDir> may be
specified as a relative path.

=item B<RequirePrivilege>: [Y|N]

Applies to B<digfull>, B<diglean>, B<mapfull>, and B<maplean>.

B<RequirePrivilege> is optional.  When enabled ('Y' or 'y'), it
indicates that the operator wants to ensure that the snapshot is
run from a privileged account.  On UNIX systems this means that
B<FTimes> must be run from an account that has a real user id of
zero (i.e., root).  On NT/2K systems this means that it must be run
from an account that has the backup and restore user rights.  The
default value is 'N'.

Note: B<FTimes> will work without privilege, but it's likely to
generate more errors due to permission problems.

=item B<RunType>: [baseline|linktest|snapshot]

Applies to B<digfull> and B<mapfull>.

B<RunType> is optional.  This control sets a corresponding flag in
the log file that classifies output data as baseline, snapshot, or
linktest.  The value of this control does not affect the format or
content of the output.  It simply classifies the data so that
automated analysis applications can process it accordingly.  The
default value is baseline.

=item B<SSLBundledCAsFile>: <file>

Applies to B<digfull>, B<mapfull>, and B<getmode>.

B<SSLBundledCAsFile> is required when B<SSLVerifyPeerCert> is
enabled.  This control specifies the name of a PEM (Privacy Enhanced
Mail) encoded file that contains a bundled set of Certificate
Authority (CA) certificates.  Any validated peer certificate that
is signed by one of these certificate authorities will be accepted
provided that the B<SSLMaxChainLength> and B<SSLExpectedPeerCN>
checks are also satisfied.  B<SSLBundledCAsFile> may be specified
as a relative path.

=item B<SSLExpectedPeerCN>: <name>

Applies to B<digfull>, B<mapfull>, and B<getmode>.

B<SSLExpectedPeerCN> is required when B<SSLVerifyPeerCert> is
enabled.  The value of this control represents the peer's expected
Common Name (CN).  Conventionally, CNs are specified as fully
qualified domain names.  This control eliminates the need to perform
a DNS lookup at the time of certificate validation.  This, in turn,
may help to prevent attacks involving DNS spoofing.

=item B<SSLMaxChainLength>: [1-10]

Applies to B<digfull>, B<mapfull>, and B<getmode>.

B<SSLMaxChainLength> is optional when B<SSLVerifyPeerCert> is
enabled.  The value of this control determines how deep a certificate
chain may be before it is considered invalid.  The default value
is one.

=item B<SSLPassPhrase>: <passphrase>

Applies to B<digfull>, B<mapfull>, and B<getmode>.

B<SSLPassPhrase> is optional when B<SSLUseCertificate> is enabled.
Its value, if specified, is used to decrypt the contents of the
client's private key file (see B<SSLPrivateKeyFile>).

=item B<SSLPrivateKeyFile>: <file>

Applies to B<digfull>, B<mapfull>, and B<getmode>.

B<SSLPrivateKeyFile> is required when B<SSLUseCertificate> is
enabled.  This control specifies the name of a PEM (Privacy Enhanced
Mail) encoded key file that can be used to sign SSL certificates.
B<SSLPrivateKeyFile> may be specified as a relative path.

=item B<SSLPublicCertFile>: <file>

Applies to B<digfull>, B<mapfull>, and B<getmode>.

B<SSLPublicCertFile> is required when B<SSLUseCertificate> is
enabled.  This control specifies the name of a PEM (Privacy Enhanced
Mail) encoded certificate that will be provided during SSL handshakes.
B<SSLPublicCertFile> may be specified as a relative path.

=item B<SSLUseCertificate>: [Y|N]

Applies to B<digfull>, B<mapfull>, and B<getmode>.

B<SSLUseCertificate> is optional.  When enabled ('Y' or 'y'), it
instructs the application to provide client side certificate
authentication, if necessary.  The default value is 'N'.

=item B<SSLVerifyPeerCert>: [Y|N]

Applies to B<digfull>, B<mapfull>, and B<getmode>.

B<SSLVerifyPeerCert> is optional.  When enabled ('Y' or 'y'), it
instructs the application to verify the credentials of the peer
server.  The default value is 'N'.

=item B<URLAuthType>: [basic|none]

Applies to B<digfull>, B<mapfull>, and B<getmode>.

B<URLAuthType> is optional.  It identifies what authentication
scheme to use when issuing HTTP/HTTPS requests.  The value specified
by this control applies to any requests involving B<URLGetURL> or
B<URLPutURL>.  When B<URLAuthType> is set to basic, user credentials
are base 64 encoded and incorporated into the request header.  User
credentials specified in the URL take precedence over credentials
specified in the B<URLUsername> and B<URLPassword> controls.  The
default value is none.

=item B<URLGetRequest>: [Dig{Full,Lean}Config|Map{Full,Lean}Config]

Applies to B<getmode>.

B<URLGetRequest> is required.  This control specifies what kind of
config file the client is requesting when it issues a GET request.
It also determines the next runmode when B<GetAndExec> is enabled.
Thus, values of Dig{Full,Lean}Config will cause B<FTimes> to restart
in B<digfull> or B<diglean> mode, and values of Map{Full,Lean}Config
will cause B<FTimes> to restart in B<mapfull> or B<maplean> mode.

=item B<URLGetURL>: <url>

Applies to B<getmode>.

B<URLGetURL> is required.  It defines the scheme, user credentials,
host address, port, and CGI application to be used when making
requests.  If a username/password pair is specified in the URL,
that pair takes precedence over the values specified by
B<URLUsername>/B<URLPassword>, if any.  URLs must use a scheme of
http or https and satisfy the following regular expression:

scheme://(user(:pass)?@)?host(:port)?/(path(\?query)?)?

=item B<URLPassword>: <password>

Applies to B<digfull>, B<mapfull>, and B<getmode>.

B<URLPassword> is optional.  It identifies the password to use when
accessing an Integrity Server.  The value specified by this control
is used in conjunction with B<URLGetURL> and B<URLPutURL> unless
those controls supply their own username/password pair.

=item B<URLPutSnapshot>: [Y|N]

Applies to B<digfull> and B<mapfull>.

B<URLPutSnapshot> is optional.  When enabled ('Y' or 'y'), B<FTimes>
attempts to post the snapshot to an Integrity Server.  Prior to
starting its scan, B<FTimes> will transmit an application layer
PING to the server to verify that it is accessible and functional.
If the remote CGI application is functioning properly, the extended
HTTP response code 250 (Ping Received) is returned.  B<URLPutSnapshot>
depends on B<URLPutURL>.  If basic authentication is required, the
controls B<URLUsername>, B<URLPassword>, and B<URLAuthType> may
need to be specified as well.  The default value is 'N'.

=item B<URLPutURL>: <url>

Applies to B<digfull> and B<mapfull>.

B<URLPutURL> is optional.  It defines the scheme, user credentials,
host address, port, and CGI application to be used when making PUT
requests.  If a username/password pair is specified in the URL,
that pair takes precedence over the values specified by
B<URLUsername>/B<URLPassword>, if any.  In any event, user credentials
are only sent when basic authentication has been requested (See
B<URLAuthType>).  B<URLPutURL> uses the same syntax as B<URLGetURL>.

=item B<URLUnlinkOutput>: [Y|N]

Applies to B<digfull> and B<mapfull>.

B<URLUnlinkOutput> is optional when B<URLPutSnapshot> is enabled.
When enabled ('Y' or 'y'), any output files are overwritten and
unlinked before the program exits.  The default value is 'N'.

=item B<URLUsername>: <username>

Applies to B<digfull>, B<mapfull>, and B<getmode>.

B<URLUsername> is optional.  It identifies the username to use when
accessing an Integrity Server.  The value specified by this control
is used in conjunction with B<URLGetURL> and B<URLPutURL> unless
those controls supply their own username/password pair.

=back

=head1 RETURN VALUES

Upon successful completion, a value of B<XER_OK> (0) is returned.
If the program encountered a critical error and had to abort
immediately, the value B<XER_Abort> (1) is returned.  If the command
line does not conform to the required syntax, a value of B<XER_Usage>
(2) is returned.  Otherwise, one of the following error codes is
returned.  These codes indicate which subsystem encountered the
fatal error.

=over 5

=item *

B<XER_BootStrap> (3)

=item *

B<XER_ProcessArguments> (4)

=item *

B<XER_Initialize> (5)

=item *

B<XER_CheckDependencies> (6)

=item *

B<XER_Finalize> (7)

=item *

B<XER_WorkHorse> (8)

=item *

B<XER_FinishUp> (9)

=item *

B<XER_FinalStage> (10)

=back

=head1 FILES

Several different files may be required as input or produced as
output in the course of running B<FTimes>.  These files are
generically described below.

=over 5

=item BaseName(_BaseNameSuffix)?.log

The main log file.  This file contains a record of the activities
that took place during a dig or map run provided that B<LogLevel>
was set at an appropriate level.

=item BaseName(_BaseNameSuffix)?.{dig,map}

The main output file.  This file contains possibly compressed map
or dig data collected during a scan.  The first line in this file
contains a header that specifies the name of each field collected.

=item Bundled Certificate Authorities

When B<SSLUseCertificate> has been enabled, B<FTimes> expects to
find a bundled certificate authorities file in the location
specified by B<SSLBundledCAs> control.  If this file does not
exist or have the proper format, B<FTimes> will abort.

=item Config

This file contains directives used to configure B<FTimes>.  In
general a particular config file applies to a single mode of
operation.  This is because different modes support different
controls.  Refer to the CONFIGURATION CONTROLS section of this
document to determine what controls apply to each mode.

=item Public Certificate and Private Key

When B<SSLUseCertificate> has been enabled, B<FTimes> expects to
find certificate and key files in the locations specified by
B<SSLPublicCert> and B<SSLPrivateKey> controls, respectively.  If
these files do not exist or have the proper format, B<FTimes> will
abort.

=item Snapshot

This is a previously created and possibly compressed map file that
is being supplied as input.  In compare mode it represents an
uncompressed map file and applies to both the B<baseline> and
B<snapshot> arguments.  In decoder mode it represents a compressed
map file.

=item XMagic

This file contains magic tests and descriptions.  The magic format
used by B<FTimes> is XMagic.  B<FTimes> searches up to three
locations for magic: (1) the location specified by the B<MagicFile>
control, (2) /usr/local/ftimes/etc/xmagic or c:\ftimes\etc\xmagic,
and (3) the current working directory.  B<FTimes> will not abort,
if a suitable file is not found, but magic output will be limited.

=back

=head1 NOTES

The name attribute may be partially encoded if it contains any
special characters.  Special characters are defined as C<[`'"|%+]>
or any non-printable character.  If a name contains Unicode
characters, the high byte is always encoded, and the low byte is
encoded as described above.  To decode an encoded name, first
convert all pluses to spaces (i.e., '+' -> ' ').  Then, moving from
left to right, convert each %HH sequence, to its byte value.  Here
'H' denotes a hex digit.

As a matter of security and good configuration control, you should
create a baseline of your entire system on a periodic basis and
whenever major events occur such as the addition/removal of software
packages or the application of system/security patches.

In critical situations it is best to enable B<RequirePrivilege>
and run B<FTimes> from a privileged account.  This will avoid common
hang-ups associated with having too little privilege.  Backup and
restore rights are required to satisfy B<RequirePrivilege> on NT
systems, and root privilege is required for UNIX systems.  If you
are simply scanning your own files, you probably do not need to
enable B<RequirePrivilege>.  On NT systems the operator may need
the bypass traverse checking privilege in addition to backup and
restore rights.  Also, make sure that domain policies aren't
rendering the operator's privileges ineffective.

In general, use the default LogLevel and review the log data after
each invocation as it may reveal errors or issues that need to be
addressed.

In general, create distinct config files for each profile you intend
to maintain.  Here, profile refers to the set of files and directories
within a given host that you intend to scan on a regular basis.
If you have a large number of profiles that share a common set of
controls, you may want to move these controls to a single file.
Then, you may simply refer to this file using the B<Import> control.

Set B<OutDir> to a directory that has the capacity to hold all
resultant data.  If external media such as jaz, zip, or floppy are
available, consider using them.  However, using a floppy is not
generally recommended unless you know that it has the capacity to
hold the data.  You may also want to consider writing output to an
NFS, Samba, or Windows share.  A third option is to use B<FTimes'>
built-in upload capability, and post your data directly to an
Integrity Server.

Setting B<LogDir> to a path that represents a floppy device may be
useful if data integrity is a concern and there is no removable or
protectible media available to store all of the anticipated output.
The reason for this is that the log file will contain an MD5 digest
of the output file upon the completion of the map.  Because the
log data was written to floppy, it would be possible to remove and
write protect this information for safe keeping.  This would provide
additional time to offload the results of the map, which can be
quite large.  Obviously, both files can still be altered by a
skilled attacker positioned to take advantage of the situation.

Manage dig and map config files on your Integrity Server, and
use B<FTimes'> get mode (i.e., B<--getmode>) to automatically retrieve
them at runtime.  This facilitates centralized management and helps
to protect potentially sensitive configuration information.

Use the B<URLPutSnapshot>, B<URLPutURL>, B<URLUsername>, B<URLPassword>,
and B<URLAuthType> controls when you want to automatically upload
data to an Integrity Server that is configured to handle
B<FTimes'> PUT requests.

If you have an SSL enabled version of B<FTimes>, you'll need to
ensure that OpenSSL and/or its libraries are installed and accessible
to B<FTimes> on the target platform.

When possible, mount target file systems as read only.  This will
help to ensure minimal time stamp perturbation.  In any event,
B<FTimes> accurately records time stamp information before it is
modified by any subsequent access.

=head1 EXAMPLES

The following examples are intended to demonstrate different ways
of configuring and using B<FTimes>.  Any text encapsulated between
'--- XXX ---' delimiters represents a file's content.

=head2 Example 1. Using map mode to baseline and upload

This example demonstrates how to baseline a system and upload the
resulting snapshot to an Integrity Server.

The first thing that needs to be done is to obtain the necessary
upload information.  Assume that an Integrity Server has already
been configured to receive snapshots.  Also, assume that the
following information has been provided:

    URL = https://192.168.1.50:443/cgi-client/nph-ftimes.cgi
    Authentication Type = Basic
    Username/ClientID = client_1
    Password = password
    AllowedFieldMask = ALL-magic
    AllowedDataType = map
    Server Validates Client Certificates = N

Observe that remote server speaks HTTPS.  Therefore, an SSL enabled
version of B<FTimes> is needed.  To determine if B<FTimes> has SSL
support, run the following command:

    ftimes --version

If B<FTimes> has SSL support, the output will have the following format:

    ftimes X.X.X ssl

where X.X.X is a version number.

The next item to tackle is the creation of a suitable config file.
The following file contains the necessary directives to complete
this task.

    --- example1.cfg ---
    BaseName=client_1
    OutDir=.
    RunType=baseline
    FieldMask=ALL-magic
    URLPutSnapshot=Y
    URLPutURL=https://192.168.1.50:443/cgi-client/nph-ftimes.cgi
    URLAuthType=basic
    URLUsername=client_1
    URLPassword=password
    Compress=Y
    --- example1.cfg ---

Note that there are no B<Include> directives.  This omission causes
B<FTimes> to map everything (i.e., the entire system).

Also, note that B<OutDir> has been set to the current directory
(i.e., '.').  This, while entirely legal, assumes that (1) '.' is
writeable and (2) there is enough disk space to hold all generated
output.

Compression was enabled to expedite data transfer.

The last step is to run B<FTimes> and review the corresponding log
output to ensure that snapshot was uploaded successfully.

    ftimes --mapfull example1.cfg

=head2 Example 2. Using dig mode to search for strings

This example demonstrates how to to search files and directories
for a set of HEX/ASCII and regular expression strings.

Given that the target file system is C</disk1>, and the list of
strings to to be sought are:

    String1 = /dev/ptyqa
    String2 = 0xda 0xbe
    String3 = 0x00 A 0x00 A 0x00 A 0x00 A
    String4 = A date of the form <YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS>
    String5 = Line oriented IP addresses of the form <BOL|tab><192.168.1.*><tab|EOL>

where

    BOL = Beginning Of Line
    EOL = End Of Line

Strings 1-3 are expressed as (ignore whitespace) ASCII, HEX, and
HEX/ASCII, respectively.  Strings 4 and 5, on the other hand, are
textual descriptions that must be translated into regular expressions.
Assume that the required B<MatchLimit> is three.  That is to say,
no more than three matches per file of any single string should be
recorded.

The following config file contains those directives required to
search all files in /disk1.

    --- example2.cfg ---
    BaseName=digger
    OutDir=.
    MatchLimit=3
    DigStringNormal=/dev/ptyqa
    DigStringNormal=%da%be
    DigStringNoCase=%00A%00A%00A%00A
    DigStringRegExp=\d{4}-\d{2}-\d{2}\x20\d{2}:\d{2}:\d{2}
    DigStringRegExp=(?m)(?:^|\t)(192\.168\.1\.\d{1,3})(?=\t|$)
    Include=/disk1
    --- example2.cfg ---

Observe that strings two and three are URL encoded and that string
three will be processed in a case insensitive manner.  Read the
B<DigStringNormal> control description for more details on URL
encoding.  Also notice that the fourth and fifth strings correspond
to Perl compatible regular expressions -- these types of dig strings
are available if you compiled B<FTimes> with PCRE support.  With
B<DigStringRegExp> patterns, however, you must specify no more than
one capturing '()' subpattern.  You can use '(?:)' if you require
additional parentheses for grouping purposes.  If you do not specify
a capturing subpattern, then the entire match will be captured.  In
this particular case, only the IP address will be captured. Also note
the use of '\x20' to represent a single space. This translation
necessary because dig strings may not contain embedded white space.

At this point B<FTimes> may be run as follows:

    ftimes --diglean example2.cfg

If spontaneity is desired over strict configuration, switch to the
B<digauto> mode of operation.  In this mode elaborate config files
aren't necessary, and output is written to stdout.  Also, no match
limit is imposed.  The following example shows how to search an
image file (e.g., example2.image) for a set of specific strings.
The output, if any, can be piped into other tools that take their
input on stdin.

    --- strings.cfg ---
    DigStringNormal=This+box+is+0wn3d    attack_program
    DigStringNormal=3l33t                attack_program
    DigStringNormal=175.20.1.7           attack_ip
    DigStringNormal=hacklist@foo.bar.com
    --- strings.cfg ---

    ftimes --digauto strings.cfg example2.image | some-other-tool

Just remember that dig strings must be URL encoded with no embedded
white space. That's why the spaces in the first string have been
replaced with '+'.  Also, note that first three dig strings are
tagged.  In other words, each string has been assigned a value that
gives it a special meaning or identity.  Because the tag for first two
dig strings is the same, it can be used to classify both strings as
belonging to the same group.

=head2 Example 3. Change analysis

This example demonstrates how to detect change between two snapshots.

Given that the following files are valid, uncompressed snapshots:

    Baseline = daily_20001230203000.map
    Snapshot = daily_20001231203000.map

Compare MD5 digests to determine (C)hanged, (M)issing, and (N)ew files.

The only critical observation needed here is that daily_20001230203000.map
is considered to be the baseline.  In other words, a baseline is
a snapshot taken at an arbitrary point in time to which subsequent
snapshots are compared.

This comparison is carried out with the following command:

    ftimes --compare none+md5 daily_20001230203000.map daily_20001231203000.map

To compare multiple attributes at the same time, simply specify the
additional fields in the B<FieldMask>. For example, the following mask
would compare MD5, SHA1, and size attributes:

    none+md5+sha1+size

To compare all attributes at the same time, use a B<FieldMask> of
'all'.

=head2 Example 4. Using get mode to download a config file

This example demonstrates how to download a config file from an
Integrity Server.

The first thing that needs to be done is to obtain the necessary
download information.  Assume that an Integrity Server has
already been configured to serve config files.  Also, assume that
the following information has been provided:

    URL = https://www.integrity.net:443/cgi-client/nph-ftimes.cgi
    Authentication Type = Basic
    Username/ClientID = client_1
    Password = password
    Server Validates Client Certificates = Y
    Server Common Name = www.integrity.net
    Maximum Certificate Chain Length = 2

Observe that remote server requires certificates.  This means that
you'll need three additional PEM encoded files: Public Certificate,
Private Key, and Bundled Certificate Authorities.  Assume that
these files are located on the target system as follows:

    /usr/local/ftimes/etc/PublicCert.pem
    /usr/local/ftimes/etc/PrivateKey.pem
    /usr/local/ftimes/etc/BundledCAs.pem

Armed with that information, the following config file may be
constructed.

    --- example5.cfg ---
    BaseName=client_1
    URLGetURL=https://www.integrity.net:443/cgi-client/nph-ftimes.cgi
    URLGetRequest=MapFullConfig
    GetAndExec=N
    URLAuthType=basic
    URLUsername=client_1
    URLPassword=password
    SSLUseCertificate=Y
    SSLPublicCertFile=/usr/local/ftimes/etc/PublicCert.pem
    SSLPrivateKeyFile=/usr/local/ftimes/etc/PrivateKey.pem
    SSLPassPhrase=passphrase
    SSLVerifyPeerCert=Y
    SSLBundledCAsFile=/usr/local/ftimes/etc/BundledCAs.pem
    SSLExpectedPeerCN=www.integrity.net
    SSLMaxChainLength=2
    --- example5.cfg ---

The following command will attempt to download a mapfull config
file from the specified Integrity Server.  If successful, the
contents of the config file will be written to stdout.

    ftimes --getmode example5.cfg

If you want to download directly to a file, you can redirect the
output to a file or add the B<GetFileName> control to your config
file.  Then, if you wanted to download a config file and take a
snapshot in one operation, simply enable B<GetAndExec>.  This causes
B<FTimes> to restart in B<--mapfull> mode.  If B<URLGetRequest> was
set to DigFullConfig, then B<FTimes> would request a digfull config
file and subsequently restart in B<--digfull> mode.

Another way to achieve the same effect is to use the original config
file and construct the following pipeline:

    ftimes --getmode example5.cfg -l 6 | ftimes --mapfull -

This has the benefit that potentially sensitive configuration
information is not specifically written to a file on disk.

Finally, note that the B<LogLevel> for the first command was set
to its highest value.  This was done simply to reduce log output
from that process.

=head1 SEE ALSO

gzip(1), magic(5), openssl(1)

=head1 AUTHOR

Klayton Monroe

=head1 HISTORY

The official or given name of this utility is B<FTimes>, but
operationally it is referred to as B<ftimes>.  In the fledgling
stages of development, the name B<FTimes> was short for B<F>ile
B<Times>.  This was because its primary purpose was to collect
timestamp information from systems suspected of having been
compromised.

The first version of B<FTimes> was written in the Spring of 1998
to support a forensic examination of a compromised system.  At that
time, B<FTimes> was primarily a workbench tool for the forensic
practitioner.  As time passed, its audience expanded to include
system administrators and computer security professionals who needed
tools to monitor the integrity of their systems.  Eventually, it
became a core component in Exodus' Content Integrity Monitoring
Service (CIMS).

In the Fall of 2001, Exodus Communications, Inc. approved my request
to make B<FTimes> Open Source.  At that time version two was very
stable, but I was in the throws of creating version three which
was a major restructuring of the code base.  Consequently, I decided
to wait until the new version was complete before releasing it to
the community.

On January 29, 2002, the first Open Source version of FTimes was
released from SourceForge.

B<FTimes> continues to support the workbench environment, but has
evolved into a tool that can be utilized to support Integrity
Monitoring in large, diverse, and distributed environments.  Today,
B<FTimes> more appropriately equates to B<F>ile B<T>opography and
B<I>ntegrity B<M>onitoring on an B<E>nterprise B<S>cale.

The original design objectives for B<FTimes> were to build a tool that:

=over 5

=item *

does one thing extremely well (i.e., collect file attributes),

=item *

utilizes a simple, effective, and well understood algorithm that can be applied equally well to different operating systems,

=item *

generates output that is easily assimilated by a wide variety of existing tools,

=item *

has built-in logging that is complete, precise, and useful for analysis purposes,

=item *

is accurate, efficient, and minimally invasive,

=item *

doesn't need to be "installed" on a given system to work on that system,

=item *

is small enough to run from floppy even if statically compiled, and

=item *

provides only a command line interface.

=back

